Add end-user docs for SAP Help (#163)
kyma-project/rt-bootstrapper: docs/user/01-runtime-bootstrapper.md

# Runtime Bootstrapper

> ## What Is the Runtime Bootstrapper?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What Is Runtime Bootstrapper?
```

> The Runtime Bootstrapper is a component that automatically adapts your workloads when they are deployed on SAP BTP, Kyma runtime. It runs transparently in the background and adjusts your Pods — and only your Pods — to meet the requirements of the specific landscape you are deploying into (for example, a landscape that uses a private container registry, requires FIPS-compliant workloads, or uses custom TLS certificates).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Runtime Bootstrapper is a component that automatically adapts your workloads when they are deployed on SAP BTP, Kyma runtime. It runs transparently in the background and adjusts your Pods — and only your Pods — to meet the requirements of the specific landscape you are deploying into (for example, a landscape that uses a private container registry, requires FIPS-compliant workloads, or uses custom TLS certificates).
```

You do not need to change your application code. All adjustments happen at Pod creation time, before the Pod starts running.

> > **Important:** The Runtime Bootstrapper only modifies **Pods**. It does not touch any other Kubernetes resources such as Deployments, Services, ConfigMaps, or Secrets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ### Note:
> Runtime Bootstrapper only modifies Pods. It does not touch any other Kubernetes resources, such as Deployments, Services, ConfigMaps, or Secrets.
```

---

> ## How to Enable It

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Enabling Runtime Bootstrapper
```

> You can opt in to Runtime Bootstrapper features at two levels:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can opt in to Runtime Bootstrapper features at two levels:
- Annotating a namespace
- Annotating a Pod or a Pod template
```

Reviewer: Is either of the two recommended?

Author: no, this depends on the use case. Would not recommend any option.

> ### Option 1: Annotate the Namespace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Annotate a Namespace
```

> Add one or more feature annotations to your Namespace. All Pods created in that namespace will automatically receive the corresponding adjustments — no changes to individual workload manifests are needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add one or more feature annotations to your namespace. As a result, all Pods created in that namespace automatically receive the corresponding adjustments, without requiring changes to individual workload manifests.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: my-namespace
  annotations:
    rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/alter-img-registry: "true"
    rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/add-img-pull-secret: "true"
```

> ### Option 2: Annotate the Pod (or Pod Template)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Annotate a Pod or a Pod Template
```

> Add annotations directly to your Pod or to the `spec.template.metadata.annotations` section of a Deployment, StatefulSet, or similar resource. Only that specific Pod (or Pods from that template) will be adjusted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add annotations directly to your Pod or to the `spec.template.metadata.annotations` section of a Deployment, StatefulSet, or similar resource. As a result, only that specific Pod or Pods from that template are adjusted.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: my-app
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      annotations:
        rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/alter-img-registry: "true"
        rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/add-img-pull-secret: "true"
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: my-container
          image: my-registry.example.com/my-app:1.0.0
```

> Both levels can be combined. If a feature is enabled on the namespace, all Pods in that namespace benefit from it regardless of their own annotations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both levels can be combined. If a feature is enabled on a namespace, all Pods in that namespace benefit from it regardless of their own annotations.
```

> > **Tip:** To enable all available features at once, use the shorthand annotation `rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/all: "true"` on either the namespace or the Pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ### Tip:
> To enable all available features at once, use the shorthand annotation `rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/all: "true"` on either the namespace or the Pod.
```

---

## Supported Annotations

> Each annotation enables one specific feature. Set the value to `"true"` to activate it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each annotation enables one specific feature. To activate it, set the value to `"true"`.
```

---

### `rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/alter-img-registry`

> **What it does:** Rewrites the container registry host in image references.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This annotation rewrites the container registry host in image references.
```

> Some landscapes require that container images are pulled from a private or landscape-specific registry instead of the original public registry. When this feature is enabled, the Runtime Bootstrapper automatically rewrites the registry hostname in the `image` field of every container and init-container in your Pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some landscapes require container images to be pulled from a private or landscape-specific registry rather than the original public registry. When this feature is enabled, Runtime Bootstrapper automatically rewrites the registry hostname in the **image** field of every container and init-container in your Pod.
```

**What changes in your Pod:**

- `.spec.containers[*].image` — registry hostname is replaced

> - `.spec.initContainers[*].image` — registry hostname is replaced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The annotation causes the following changes in your Pod:

- `.spec.containers[*].image` — registry hostname is replaced
- `.spec.initContainers[*].image` — registry hostname is replaced
```

> You do not need to know the target registry address; this is configured centrally for the landscape.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You don't need to know the target registry address, because it's configured centrally for the landscape.
```

---

### `rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/add-img-pull-secret`

> **What it does:** Injects image pull credentials into your Pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This annotation injects image pull credentials into your Pod.
```

> When a private container registry requires authentication, the Runtime Bootstrapper adds a reference to the landscape's image pull Secret (`registry-credentials`) to your Pod. This ensures your Pod can pull images without you having to manage registry credentials yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a private container registry requires authentication, Runtime Bootstrapper adds a reference to the landscape's image pull Secret (`registry-credentials`) to your Pod. This ensures your Pod can pull images without you having to manage registry credentials yourself.
```

> **What changes in your Pod:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The annotation causes the following change in your Pod:
```

- `.spec.imagePullSecrets[]` — entry `registry-credentials` is appended

If the Secret reference is already present, it is not added again.

---

### `rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/add-cluster-trust-bundle`

> **What it does:** Mounts the cluster's TLS certificate bundle into your containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The annotation mounts the cluster's TLS certificate bundle into your containers.
```

> Some landscapes use custom TLS certificates that are not included in the standard operating system trust store. When this feature is enabled, the Runtime Bootstrapper mounts the cluster's certificate bundle as a read-only volume into every container (including init-containers) under the path `/etc/ssl/certs`. This allows your application to trust landscape-specific HTTPS endpoints without any code changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some landscapes use custom TLS certificates that are not included in the standard operating system trust store. When this feature is enabled, Runtime Bootstrapper mounts the cluster's certificate bundle as a read-only volume into every container (including init-containers) under the path `/etc/ssl/certs`. With this, your application can trust landscape-specific HTTPS endpoints without any code changes.
```

> **What changes in your Pod:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The annotation causes the following changes in your Pod:
```

- `.spec.volumes[]` — a projected volume named `rt-bootstrapper-certs` is added
- `.spec.containers[*].volumeMounts` — the volume is mounted read-only at `/etc/ssl/certs`
- `.spec.initContainers[*].volumeMounts` — same mount applied to init-containers

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

#### Certificate Rotation

```

Reviewer: Let's add it as a subsection here.

> > **Important — certificate rotation:** The mounted CA bundle can change over time. Certificates are rotated periodically for security reasons, and the file at `/etc/ssl/certs` will be updated in place without restarting your Pod. Most application runtimes load TLS trust stores once at startup and do not automatically pick up changes from the filesystem. If your application is not aware of this, it will start rejecting HTTPS connections to landscape endpoints after a rotation event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ### Caution:
> The mounted CA bundle can change over time. Certificates are rotated periodically for security reasons, and the file at `/etc/ssl/certs` is updated in place without restarting your Pod. Most application runtimes load TLS trust stores once at startup and do not automatically pick up changes from the filesystem. If your application is not aware of this, it starts rejecting HTTPS connections to landscape endpoints after a rotation event.
```

>
> To handle certificate rotation, choose one of the following approaches:
>
> - **Watch for file changes inside your application.** Implement a file watcher that detects changes under `/etc/ssl/certs` and reloads the trust store at runtime without restarting the process. This is the most resilient approach and avoids any downtime.

> > - **Trigger an externally managed restart.** Use a controller that watches the underlying `ClusterTrustBundle` resource and automatically rolls your workload when it changes. This is conceptually similar to how [stakater/Reloader](https://github.com/stakater/Reloader) restarts Pods when a referenced ConfigMap or Secret changes. A restart ensures the new certificate is loaded, at the cost of a brief interruption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

To handle certificate rotation, choose one of the following approaches:

- Watch for file changes inside your application:  Implement a file watcher that detects changes under `/etc/ssl/certs` and reloads the trust store at runtime without restarting the process. This is the most resilient approach and avoids any downtime.
- Trigger an externally managed restart: Use a controller that watches the underlying `ClusterTrustBundle` resource and automatically rolls your workload when it changes. This is conceptually similar to how [stakater/Reloader](https://github.com/stakater/Reloader) restarts Pods when a referenced ConfigMap or Secret changes. A restart ensures the new certificate is loaded, at the cost of a brief interruption.
```

---

### `rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/set-fips-mode`

> **What it does:** Signals FIPS 140 compliance mode to your workloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This annotation signals FIPS 140 compliance mode to your workloads.
```

> FIPS (Federal Information Processing Standards) mode restricts cryptographic operations to approved algorithms. When this feature is enabled, the Runtime Bootstrapper sets two environment variables in every container and init-container. Your application can read these variables to activate its own FIPS-compliant code paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) mode restricts cryptographic operations to approved algorithms. When this feature is enabled, Runtime Bootstrapper sets two environment variables in every container and init-container. Your application can read these variables to activate its own FIPS-compliant code paths.
```

> **What changes in your Pod:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The annotation causes the following changes in your Pod:
```

- `.spec.containers[*].env[]` — the following variables are added to every container:
  - `KYMA_FIPS_MODE_ENABLED=true`
  - `FIPS_MODE_ENABLED=true` *(legacy compatibility)*

> - `.spec.initContainers[*].env[]` — same variables added to init-containers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `.spec.initContainers[*].env[]` — the following variables are added to init-containers:
  - `KYMA_FIPS_MODE_ENABLED=true`
  - `FIPS_MODE_ENABLED=true` *(legacy compatibility)*
```

---

### `rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/set-landscape`

> **What it does:** Injects the landscape identifier into your containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This annotation injects the landscape identifier into your containers.
```

> Some applications need to know which landscape they are running on to adjust their behavior (for example, to point to the correct backend endpoint or to display the correct region label). When this feature is enabled, the Runtime Bootstrapper injects the landscape identifier as an environment variable into every container and init-container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some applications must know which landscape they are running on to adjust their behavior (for example, to point to the correct backend endpoint or to display the correct region label). When this feature is enabled, Runtime Bootstrapper injects the landscape identifier as an environment variable into every container and init-container.
```

> **What changes in your Pod:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The annotation causes the following changes in your Pod:
```

- `.spec.containers[*].env[]` — the following variable is added:
  - `KYMA_LANDSCAPE=<landscape-identifier>`

> - `.spec.initContainers[*].env[]` — same variable added to init-containers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `.spec.containers[*].env[]` - the `KYMA_LANDSCAPE=<landscape-identifier>` variable is added
- `.spec.initContainers[*].env[]` - the `KYMA_LANDSCAPE=<landscape-identifier>` variable is added
```

The actual value of the landscape identifier is provided by the landscape operator and is not configurable by the workload owner.

---

### `rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/all`

> **What it does:** Shorthand to enable all available features at once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The annotation is a shorthand to enable all available features at once.
```

Setting this annotation to `"true"` is equivalent to setting every feature annotation listed above. Use it when you want your namespace or Pod to receive all landscape adaptations without listing them individually.

```yaml
annotations:
  rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/all: "true"
```

---

## Confirming a Pod Was Modified

> After the Runtime Bootstrapper processes a Pod, it adds the following annotation to the Pod metadata:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After Runtime Bootstrapper processes a Pod, it adds the following annotation to the Pod metadata:
```

```
rt-bootstrapper.kyma-project.io/modified: "true"
```

> You can verify this with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To verify this, replace the placeholder and run:
```

```sh
kubectl get pod <pod-name> -o jsonpath='{.metadata.annotations.rt-bootstrapper\.kyma-project\.io/modified}'
```

If the output is `true`, the Pod was successfully processed.

---

## Summary Table

| Annotation | What it enables |
|---|---|
| `rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/alter-img-registry: "true"` | Rewrite container image registry hostnames |
| `rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/add-img-pull-secret: "true"` | Inject image pull Secret (`registry-credentials`) |
| `rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/add-cluster-trust-bundle: "true"` | Mount cluster TLS certificates at `/etc/ssl/certs` |
| `rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/set-fips-mode: "true"` | Set `KYMA_FIPS_MODE_ENABLED` and `FIPS_MODE_ENABLED` env vars |
| `rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/set-landscape: "true"` | Set `KYMA_LANDSCAPE` env var |

> | `rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/all: "true"` | Enable all of the above |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: This section can be safely removed from the doc. Doesn't add much value, since this information is already covered earlier in the doc. Could be useful in another doc.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: my-namespace
  annotations:
    rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/alter-img-registry: "true"
    rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/add-img-pull-secret: "true"
```

### Annotating a Pod or a Pod Template

Add annotations directly to your Pod or to the `spec.template.metadata.annotations` section of a Deployment, StatefulSet, or similar resource. As a result, only that specific Pod or Pods from that template are adjusted.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: my-app
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      annotations:
        rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/alter-img-registry: "true"
        rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/add-img-pull-secret: "true"
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: my-container
          image: my-registry.example.com/my-app:1.0.0
```

Both levels can be combined. If a feature is enabled on a namespace, all Pods in that namespace benefit from it regardless of their own annotations.

---

## Supported Annotations

Each annotation enables one specific feature. To activate it, set the value to `"true"`.

> | Annotation | Typical use case | NS2 (Sovereign Cloud) | CN |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Annotation | Typical use case | US Sovereign Cloud (NS2) | China (CN) |
```

# Runtime Bootstrapper

## What Is Runtime Bootstrapper?

Runtime Bootstrapper is a component that automatically adapts your workloads when they are deployed on SAP BTP, Kyma runtime. It runs transparently in the background and adjusts your Pods — and only your Pods — to meet the requirements of the specific landscape you are deploying into (for example, a landscape that uses a private container registry, requires FIPS-compliant workloads, or uses custom TLS certificates).

You do not need to change your application code. All adjustments happen at Pod creation time, before the Pod starts running.

> ### Note:
> Runtime Bootstrapper only modifies Pods. It does not touch any other Kubernetes resources, such as Deployments, Services, ConfigMaps, or Secrets.

---

## Enabling Runtime Bootstrapper

You can opt in to Runtime Bootstrapper features at two levels:
- Annotating a namespace
- Annotating a Pod or a Pod template

> ### Annotate a Namespace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Annotating a Namespace
```

Add one or more feature annotations to your namespace. As a result, all Pods created in that namespace automatically receive the corresponding adjustments, without requiring changes to individual workload manifests.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: my-namespace
  annotations:
    rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/alter-img-registry: "true"
    rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/add-img-pull-secret: "true"
```

> ### Annotate a Pod or a Pod Template

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Annotating a Pod or a Pod Template
```

Add annotations directly to your Pod or to the `spec.template.metadata.annotations` section of a Deployment, StatefulSet, or similar resource. As a result, only that specific Pod or Pods from that template are adjusted.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: my-app
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      annotations:
        rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/alter-img-registry: "true"
        rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/add-img-pull-secret: "true"
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: my-container
          image: my-registry.example.com/my-app:1.0.0
```

Both levels can be combined. If a feature is enabled on a namespace, all Pods in that namespace benefit from it regardless of their own annotations.

> ### Tip:
> To enable all available features at once, use the shorthand annotation `rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/all: "true"` on either the namespace or the Pod.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---

## Supported Annotations

Each annotation enables one specific feature. To activate it, set the value to `"true"`.

| Annotation | Typical use case |
|---|---|
| [`rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/add-cluster-trust-bundle`](#rt-cfgkyma-projectioadd-cluster-trust-bundle) | Primary feature for NS2 (Sovereign Cloud) — mounts custom CA certificates required to trust SAP backend endpoints |
| [`rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/add-img-pull-secret`](#rt-cfgkyma-projectioadd-img-pull-secret) | Only relevant when pulling images from a private registry that requires authentication |
| [`rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/alter-img-registry`](#rt-cfgkyma-projectioalter-img-registry) | Only required when the container registry hostname must be rewritten to a landscape-specific mirror |
| [`rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/set-fips-mode`](#rt-cfgkyma-projectioset-fips-mode) | Primarily NS2-related — signals to workloads that FIPS 140-compliant cryptography should be used |
| [`rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/set-landscape`](#rt-cfgkyma-projectioset-landscape) | Injects the landscape identifier for workloads that need to know which environment they run in |

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

> ### Tip:
> To enable all available features at once, use the shorthand annotation [`rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/all: "true"`](#rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/all) on either a namespace or a Pod.

```

> > **Note for NS2 (Sovereign Cloud) customers:** The annotations listed below cover all configuration features supported by the Runtime Bootstrapper. In an NS2 environment, the CA bundle injection (`rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/add-cluster-trust-bundle`) is the primary feature you will need. The other features — image registry rewriting, pull secret injection, FIPS mode, and landscape identification — are only required in special cases and can be ignored for common deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ## Note
> In the US Sovereign Cloud (NS2) environment, the CA bundle injection (rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/add-cluster-trust-bundle) is the primary feature you need. The other features — image registry rewriting, pull secret injection, FIPS mode, and landscape identification — are only required in special cases and can be ignored for common deployments.
```

Reviewer: Now, with the table added before listing the annotations, we could add this note above the table and the tip right under it. WDYT?

---

## Supported Annotations

Each annotation enables one specific feature. To activate it, set the value to `"true"`.

| Annotation | Typical use case |
|---|---|
| [`rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/add-cluster-trust-bundle`](#rt-cfgkyma-projectioadd-cluster-trust-bundle) | Primary feature for NS2 (Sovereign Cloud) — mounts custom CA certificates required to trust SAP backend endpoints |
| [`rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/add-img-pull-secret`](#rt-cfgkyma-projectioadd-img-pull-secret) | Only relevant when pulling images from a private registry that requires authentication |
| [`rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/alter-img-registry`](#rt-cfgkyma-projectioalter-img-registry) | Only required when the container registry hostname must be rewritten to a landscape-specific mirror |
| [`rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/set-fips-mode`](#rt-cfgkyma-projectioset-fips-mode) | Primarily NS2-related — signals to workloads that FIPS 140-compliant cryptography should be used |
| [`rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/set-landscape`](#rt-cfgkyma-projectioset-landscape) | Injects the landscape identifier for workloads that need to know which environment they run in |

> ### Tip:

> > To enable all available features at once, use the shorthand annotation [`rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/all: "true"`](#rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/all) on either a namespace or a Pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> To enable all available features at once, use the shorthand annotation [`rt-cfg.kyma-project.io/all: "true"`](#rt-cfgkyma-projectioall) on either a namespace or a Pod.
```
